ECE342, Lab 5, 2025
University of Toronto
DMA/DCMI using the OV7670 camera
Karthik Ganesan
Introduction
In this lab, you will be interfacing to an external camera model using the Nucleo platform. You will be using the OV7670
module, a board including a camera and configurable DSP functionalities. To interface with the OV7670, you will be using
the I2C and DCMI protocols, and the Direct Memory Address (DMA) feature of the Nucleo platform. At the end of this lab
document, you will find a list of items that you must show your TA when being marked during your in-lab demo.
1. The OV7670 module
The OV7670 is a versatile camera module that allows you to configure a number of features such as frame size, frame rate,
and pixel format, as well as timing, clock polarity, and others. You can configure these settings by writing to the appropriate
registers using the camera’s propritary SCCB protocol. This protocol is very similar to the I2C protocol you used in lab 4, to
connect to the SSD1306 OLED screen.
The complete list of all 209 registers you can set for this camera is available in the OV7670 datasheet. However, for this lab,
you will just need a preselected configuration, in which the camera outputs a stream of QCIF frames (which are 144×174
pixels in size) at 15 frames per second (fps), in the YCbCr color format. As you saw in class, the camera module transmits one
full image (i.e., one frame) at a time. For each frame, the camera sends each ‘row’ of the image and for each row, it sends each
pixel one after another. Our ultimate goal is to save each frame as one large ‘array’ in memory. This allows us to then operate
on that image (e.g., if we want to post-process the image to detect objects in it or maybe we want to transmit the image wireless
over bluetooth etc).
The camera module uses a complex signalling format for sending each frame. For the OV7670, this includes signals such as:
• D0-D7: parallel data lines representing 8 bits of a single pixel.
• Pixel Clock (PCLK): changes every time pixel data changes.
• Horizontal Sync (HSYNC): indicates when one line of the frame has been transmitted.
• Vertical Sync (VSYNC): indicates when an entire frame has been transmitted.
The Nucleo board must read these signals to understand what information is being sent. One option would be to write code
ourselves for reading these signals to figure out which row and pixel is being sent each clock cycle and how it should be saved in
memory. However, this is extremely error-prone and does not make efficient use of the CPU. Fortunately, the Nucleo platform
includes a dedicated peripheral called the Digital Camera Interface (DCMI) which handles this signalling for us. For this lab,
you only need to configure the DCMI to connect to the camera to read images from it.
1.1 Color formats
For this lab, we will only be sending images in 8-bit grayscale. This means that each pixel will consist of 1 byte; 0x00 will
represent a black pixel and 0xFF will represent a white pixel. The OV7670 camera does not support a grayscale mode. We
will instead be using the YCbCr mode, where the Y component represents the image ‘brightness’ and Cb and Cr encode color
information.
When reading a pixel from the camera in YCbCr mode, each pixel will be represented as 16-bits. However, to reduce bandwidth
the Cb and Cr components are only sent for every second pixel. For example, if Yi
, Cbi and Cri represents the Y, Cb and Cr
components for pixel i, the bytes sent from the camera are as follows: Cb0,Y0,Cr0,Y1,Cb2,Y2,Cr2,Y3,Cb4,Y4,Cr4,Y5.
If we wanted to represent every pixel with full color, we would need to first re-arrange these bytes to be in the right order.
However, we only want to display images in grayscale. This means that you can simply ignore every byte that is not a Y
component. NOTE: But keep in mind that the camera still sends 16-bits per pixel. You must handle choosing the right byte in
your code.
DMA/DCMI using the OV7670 camera — 2/6
1.2 Set up HCLK
The OV7670 peripheral needs an external clock signal to function properly. We provide this clock from the Nucleo board by
assigning one GPIO pin to a Pulse Width Modulated (PWM) signal generated with a timer. The use of a dedicated hardware
timer allows the Nucleo board to generate a fast clock without overloading the CPU. For this lab, we use Timer 1 of the Nucleo
Board with 8 MHz frequency, and 50 % duty cycle.
Try it yourself: Look at the HCLK signal with an oscilloscope. Do you observe a square wave? Why or why not?
DMA
While the DCMI handles the signalling with the camera, we still need a way to copy the DCMI output to memory. For this we
will use the Direct Memory Address (DMA) capability of the Nucleo platform. DMA is a dedicated hardware block which can
read and write to memory without requiring the CPU. DMA is particularly helpful when you need to perform a long series of
reads and writes, which is exactly what we are trying to do when copying an image from the camera to memory.
In this lab, you will use the DMA functionality to copy image frames captured through DCMI into system memory. When a
new frame is available, the DMA interrupt is triggered to copy the frame to memory. The rest of the time, the CPU is free to
work on other tasks.
2. Hardware Set Up
First, connect the OV7670 module to the Nucleo board. Using jumper cables, make the connections shown in Figures 1 and 2.
The connections are also listed in the Table.
WARNING: Please take your time and make these connections CAREFULLY. A very common reason for the camera ‘not
working’ is because the connections are not correct. Also, be VERY CAREFUL to connect Vdd and GND correctly. If you
mix these up, you can permanently damage your camera module and be unable to use it for this lab.
2.1 Sending Images Through Serial Port
When working with images, it is important to have a way to visualize the results. In this lab you will use the serial port to
transmit image data from the Nucleo board to your computer, and visualize the images with the serial_monitor program
provided with this hand out.
First, download serial_monitor.exe and make sure you have permissions to execute it. Open a command line interface
and run .\serial_monitor.exe --help. You should see the following output:
> .\serial_monitor.exe --help
Usage: serial_monitor.py [OPTIONS]
Display images transferred through serial port. Press ’q’ to close.
Options:
-p, --port TEXT Serial (COM) port of the target board
-br, --baudrate INTEGER Serial port baudrate
--timeout INTEGER Serial port timeout
--rows INTEGER Number of rows in the image
--cols INTEGER Number of columns in the image
--preamble TEXT Preamble string before the frame
--suffix TEXT Suffix string after receiving the frame
--help Show this message and exit.
Modify the main function in Keil µVision to send the following sequence through serial port:
• String "\r\nPREAMBLE!\r\n".
• The character 0x00 25,056 times (144×174).
On your computer, run .\serial_monitor.exe -p <Nucleo board COM port>. If your implementation is
correct, a graphical window will open showing a black rectangle. Next, modify your code to output character 0xFF instead
of 0x00. The serial_monitor should show a completely white rectangle. You may experiment with shades of gray, or
alternating patterns.
When you can reliably send and visualize artificially generated images, you may proceed to the next section.
DMA/DCMI using the OV7670 camera — 3/6
Figure 1
Figure 2
I/O Number Camera I/O I/O Label on Nucleo
1 3.3V 3V3
2 DGND GND
3 SCL I2C (top)
4 SDA I2C (bottom)
5 VS RX DO
6 HS SPI B (2nd from bottom)
7 PLK D12
8 XLK D6
9 D7 SAI A (1st from bottom)
10 D6 SAI A (2nd from bottom)
11 D5 USART (1st from bottom)
12 D4 SAI A (2nd from top)
13 D3 SDMMC (2nd from top)
14 D2 SDMMC (1st from top)
15 D1 I2S B (bottom)
16 D0 I2S A (top)
DMA/DCMI using the OV7670 camera — 4/6
3. Taking a Snapshot on Command
In this section you will configure the OV7670 camera with I2C , and use the camera to take a snapshot when button B1 is
pressed. Here are the steps you must take to do this:
3.1 Writing to a register
First, complete functions ov7670_read() and ov7670_write() in file ov7670.c.
Unlike Lab 4, where the RTC module was fully I2C compatible, the SCCB interface used by the OV7670 is more limited.
Thus, the HAL_I2C_MemRead and HAL_I2C_MemWrite functions will not work as expected here.
You should instead use the HAL_I2C_Master_Transmit and HAL_I2C_Master_Receive functions. These work
very similarly to the functions you used in Lab 4. HAL_I2C_Master_Transmit is described as follows:
HAL_StatusTypeDef HAL_Master_Transmit(
I2C_HandleTypeDef * hi2c,
uint16_t DevAddress,
uint8_t * pData,
uint16_t Size,
uint32_t Timeout )
HAL_I2C_Master_Receive is the same, with the only difference being that pData is sent in one but received in the other.
Both these functions return HAL_OK if the operation was successful and HAL_ERROR if they fail.
A few things to watch out for, when writing ov7670_read() and ov7670_write().
1. Because the controller on the OV7670 is not very fast, you should use a generous timeout (e.g., 10,000) for these
functions.
2. Also, they may not work the first time. So you should call them in a loop and only exit the loop when you get HAL_OK.
To verify that you can read a register from the camera, try reading register 0x0A and verify that it contains the correct product
number of 0x76.
3.2 Configure the camera
Next, you must write code to configure the camera at the start. This involves writing to lots of registers that configure the
camera to work the way we want. To make this part easier, the ov7670.c file contains a large array called OV7670_reg[].
This array lists the address of every register in the camera and what value that register needs to be set to. To initialize the
camera, you must complete ov7670_init() by writing the value to the address of each register in OV7670_reg[]. Since
the camera does not run as fast as the CPU, you should leave a 10ms delay between writes (using HAL_Delay(10)).
3.3 Configuring the DMA
You must now complete ov7670_snapshot() to take one photo using the camera, and then copy that picture (or “frame”)
to memory. This requires starting the DMA using the HAL_DCMI_Start_DMA function. The description of this function is
as follows:
HAL_StatusTypeDef HAL_DCMI_Start_DMA(
DCMI_HandleTypeDef * hdcmi,
uint32_t DCMI_Mode,
uint32_t pData,
uint32_t Length )
Parameters:
1. hdcmi : pointer to a DCMI_HandleTypeDef structure that contains the configuration information for DCMI.
2. DCMI_Mode : DCMI capture mode snapshot or continuous grab. You can use DCMI_MODE_SNAPSHOT for this part.
3. pData : The destination memory Buffer address.
4. Length : The length of capture to be transferred.
DMA/DCMI using the OV7670 camera — 5/6
Now, complete function ov7670_snapshot() by calling HAL_DCMI_Start_DMA() with the appropriate parameters.
NOTE: Notice that pData accepts 32-bit values while the camera transmits 16-bits per pixel. So think about how the Length
parameter will change because of this.
The DMA has been configured so that it fires the DMA2_Stream1 interrupt when it is done copying one frame. If the Length
parameter is wrong, the DMA may never complete that many transfers and this interrupt will never trigger.
3.4 Capturing one frame
Now, modify main() to capture a snapshot when button B1 is pressed. You should do this by calling the 0v7670_snapshot()
function you completed above. However, since you are using interrupts, you need a way to tell when the DMA has finished
transferring an image. For this, you should modify DMA2_Stream1_IRQHandler() in stm32f4xx_it.c to set a flag
that you can read in main().
You should include a small HAL_Delay() inside any loop where you are waiting for the DMA interrupt to trigger. The reason
for this is unclear; but not doing this can sometimes cause the DMA interrupt to never trigger. This is likely an issue with the
STM codebase.
3.5 Sending one frame
When an image has been captured, you should then send it through the serial port. Remember that the raw image is in YCbCr
format. To produce a grayscale image you must only send the odd-indexed bytes form the buffer (i.e. buff[1], buff[3],
buff[5], etc.).
WARNING: If you always get an image that is almost totally gray with just a few edges visible, you may be sending the wrong
bytes (buff[0], buff[2], buff[4], etc.).
4. Producing a Video-Like Stream
Once you are able to capture one frame by pressing B1, you should modify your code to continuously capture and display
images. You should do this using the following steps:
4.1 Using the continuous DCMI mode
Complete function ov7670_capture() by calling HAL_DCMI_Start_DMA() with the appropriate parameters to capture
incoming data on a loop. The only change you need to make is to start the DMA in ‘continuous’ (i.e., DCMI_MODE_CONTINUOUS)
instead of the ‘snapshot’ (i.e., DCMI_MODE_SNAPSHOT) mode you used earlier.
4.2 Modify main to work continuously
You must also modify main() to continuously capture snapshots and send them through the serial port. Take care to make
your implementation as efficient as possible. Be careful about adding unnecessary delays in your code.
4.3 Avoiding tearing
Your code must run as fast as possible, without ‘tearing’ which occurs when you update the image buffer as you are transmitting
it. You can see this as a horizontal ‘tear’ along the image; the part above the tear belongs to one frame and the part below belongs
to another frame. One way to avoid screen tearing is by suspending the DCMI hardware when a new frame is captured, and
resuming after it has been processed. You can do this by calling the HAL_DCMI_Suspend() and HAL_DCMI_Resume()
functions. Both these functions take a single argument: the pointer to a DCMI_HandleTypeDef structure.
Try it yourself: Assuming that the UART communication is the bottleneck, what is the highest frame rate possible?
Try it yourself: Use a timer to profile your implementation. How long does it take to capture a frame and make it available by
DMA? How long does it take to send it through serial port?
DMA/DCMI using the OV7670 camera — 6/6
5. In-lab Demo
During your lab session, you must show your TA the following: send a video-like continuous stream of images through the
serial port. Visualize this video using the serial_monitor tool. Comment on your results, including how many frames per
second you achieved. If your video functionality is working, this is all you need to show your TA.
If your video functionality is not working, you should demo the snapshot mode. For this mode, when B1 is pressed, capture a snapshot and send it to the computer through serial port. For full marks, your images should show little or no screen tearing.
Your TA may ask questions about your solution. Be prepared to explain your design decisions and your code.