ntroduction to STM32 Nucleo ECE342, Winter 2026Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering University of Toronto
Introduction
This lab will introduce you to the 32-bit Nucleo platform from ST Microelectronics that you will use for the labs in ECE342.
You will also learn how to use the different software tools you will need to connect to the Nucleo board.
NOTE: Unfortunately, Keil μVision is only available for Windows. If you have a Mac, you may try using the STMCubeIDE
developed by ST Microelectronics, available here. While we expect it will work very similarly to Keil μVision , we cannot
guarantee this and therefore the teaching team might not be able to support you if you run into issues using STMCubeIDE.
Everything you need for ECE342 is already installed on the DESL lab room computers. However, we strongly recommend
you still download and install them on your own computer, for two important reasons:
1) The labs are only open for limited time periods. Having the software on your own computer makes it easy for you to work on
the labs outside of scheduled lab sessions.
2) The version installed in the labs has a code size limit. This means, that the biggest program you can run is 32KB. While this
is not an issue for the labs, some of you may have larger programs for your projects. This document provides instructions to
install a version which does not have this code size limit.
NOTE: Start without the board or the USB cable connected to your computer.
1. Installing software
The software you will need for ECE342 is:
1. Keil μVision : The main IDE you will use to download programs to and debug the STM32-Nucleo platform.
2. ST-LINK Drivers: The drivers needed by the Nucleo platform to connect with your computer.
3. Hercules SETUP utility: This program will let you see messages sent from your Nucleo board on a connected computer.
We will now see how you can install each of these.
1.1 Keil μVision
Keil μVision is a popular IDE used in industry to work with embedded systems. We will be using the Keil Microcontroller
Development Kit (MDK) software to program the ARM-M4 CPU on the STM32 Nucleo board. MDK uses the Keil μVision
Integrated Development Environment (IDE).
Go to this website and fill in the required details. This is only required for Keil to gather statistics on who is using their software.
What you fill in does not affect anything; you will still be able to download the software. Once you fill in the details, you will
see a page titled MDK ARM. At the bottom, you will see MDK 541.EXE. Download this to your computer and install Keil
μVision . You do not need to open Keil μVision yet; we will do that in a later step.
1.2 ST-Link Drivers
You will connect to the Nucleo board over a USB cable. For this, you will also need to install the USB drivers for the Nucleo
board, which you can get from this website. NOTE: Make sure to download and install the drivers BEFORE connecting the
Nucleo board to your computer. Once the drivers are installed, you may need to restart your computer for the drivers to get
loaded.
To verify the drivers were installed correctly, you can now connect your board to your computer using the USB cable. Your
computer should show a folder titled ‘NUCLEO’, which means that the drivers were installed correctly. If you do not see this
window, it may mean that you have a ‘power-only’ USB cable.
Next, you will need a program that lets you communicate with the Nucleo platform.
Introduction to STM32 Nucleo
Figure 1. Hercules SETUP utility, showing the ‘Serial’ tab.
1.3 Hercules SETUP utility
To start with, let us see why you need this program.
Using the COM port for printing. You will be doing the majority of your programming using C in ECE342. On
a regular computer, you can use printf statements to debug your code. However, embedded platforms do not have a
screen so we need another way to use printf statements for debugging. Embedded systems frequently use a Universal
Synchronous/Asynchronous Receive Transmit (USART) serial communication protocol to send messages
from the embedded system to a regular computer. USART is connected to your computer via a COM port. You will learn how
USART works in lectures, later in the term. Many decades ago, computers typically came with COM ports but modern computers
do not. The Nucleo board, therefore sends this data over the same USB cable. However, your computer still ‘sees’ this as a
separate COM port.
Reading COM data. Now, we need a way to read the data sent over the COM port and display it. For this, we will use the
Hercules program as our ‘screen’ to print messages from the board to a computer. Download the program from the website
here. Hercules is a standalone program, that can simply be run without having to be installed first.
Open the Hercules program and click on the Serial tab at the top. You will see a large window as shown in Figure 1. This is
your ‘terminal’; messages printed from your Nucleo board will appear here. You will not need to change anything right away;
simply leave the program open for now.
2. Running your first program
Start by downloading the sample blinky project provided on the course Quercus. Blinky is often the first program everyone runs
when learning to use a new embedded platform, similar to hello world when you learn a new programming language. This very
simple program will toggle the blue LED on the board on and off at a set rate. Unzip the provided lab0.zip file on Quercus.
Then, navigate to MDK-ARM/blinky.uvproj to start Keil μVision .
The Keil μVision IDE interface: At first you will only see the Project explorer window on the left. This shows you the
hierarchy of your entire project. As you can see, even for a very simple program, a large number of files are included in the
project. Expand the Src folder and open main.c. You should see the window shown in Figure 2.
Page 2 of 5
Introduction to STM32 Nucleo
Figure 2. The Keil μVision IDE showing the blinky program.
Understanding the provided code: We will now go through and explain the code shown in Figure 2. After including the
necessary header files, main.c has prototypes for functions declared later in the file. In main(), there are several functions
with initialize different board peripherals. We won’t go into the specifics of each of them but to give you an idea of what each
of them does (and to give you a preview of what you will learning throughout the course), they are:
1. HAL init() initializes the Hardware Abstraction Layer or HAL. The HAL is a set of functions provided by the
board vendor (i.e., ST Microelectronics), that allows for easy access to the board’s registers and peripherals.
2. SystemClock Config(), provided further down in the code, configures the clock circuitry for the board, to provide the clock
that our system uses.
3. MX GPIO Init() configures the General Purpose Input/Output (GPIO) pins on the board. The GPIOs are the
main way for us to connect the board to external peripherals so we will be using the GPIOs function a lot this term.
4. MX USART UART Init() configures the USART (or Serial) communication protocol that allows us to ‘print’ from the
board to the Hercules utility.
All of these functions are defined in config.c. There is also code which creates a string, which we can use for printing. We
Page 3 of 5
Introduction to STM32 Nucleo
will look at printing in more detail later.
Code inside an infinite loop: You will see that main ends with a while(1) loop. Code running on embedded systems
typically uses such an infinite loop. As the programs we will run do not have an OS, there is nowhere for the main() function to
return to. So, any code you want to run continuously should be placed inside this while(1) loop. For the blinky program, you
will see two lines inside the loop.
Toggling the LED: The first line toggles the blue LED, which is labelled LD2 on the board itself. As the LED is outside the
actual chip, it is connected to our system via a GPIO. So, we use the HAL GPIO TogglePin() function to toggle the LED; if it is
on, we turn it off and vice-versa. The toggle function takes two parameters: 1) The port that the GPIO is part of and 2) The
specific GPIO pin connected to the LED. Both of these are provided as #defines in the main.h file.
Adding a delay: Since the board is running at several megahertz, if we toggled the LED every clock cycle, we would just see
it being on all the time. To slow down the rate of toggling, we need to add a small delay, which we do using the HAL Delay()
function. This function takes in a time (in milliseconds) and causes the CPU to wait for that long before continuing.
Running on a board: To compile the blinky project, select Project >Build Project or press the F 7 key. You will see the
compilation output in the Build Output window, at the bottom of the IDE. This is where you check if you had any compile errors
that you need to fix. Once this is done, you can connect your Nucleo board to your computer using the provided USB cable. To
download your code to the board, select Flash >Download or press the F 8 key. Your code should now be downloaded onto
the Flash memory of the Nucleo board. Press the black RESET button on the board to execute the code.
You should now see the blue LED on the board flashing at a fixed speed. Try changing the value inside the HAL Delay() to
change the rate of flashing. You can try running other experiments to better understand this code.
At this point, Keil μVision may say that the firmware on your board is dated and it will ask to update it, which you can go
ahead and do.
Throughout the labs for ECE342, we will suggest ideas for your to try for yourself, which will be presented in boxes like the
one shown below:
Try it yourself: Try flashing different Morse code patterns on the LED, similar to Lab 5 in ECE241. You can find the
full Morse Code alphabet here. How can you store the sequence of dots and dashes for each letter? Can you flash a word
or even a whole sentence?
2.1 Printing from the board
Setting up Hercules: Now that you have run your first program, let’s see how you can send information from your board
to your computer. We will use the Universal Synchronous/Asynchronous Receive Transmit (USART)
peripheral for printing. The Nucleo board we are using has several USART interfaces. To use for printing, we must use USART2,
which is connected via USB to the computer.
In the provided code, config.c already configures USART2 for you. Similar to the Nucleo board, computers also sup-
port many ‘COM’ ports. So we will need to find out which COM port the Nucleo board is connected to. Open the
check-com-port.bat file, included in lab0.zip. If your board is connected (and your computer can communicate with
your board), you will see the COM port the board is connected to on the terminal window that appears.
Next, open the Hercules program and click on the Serial page at the top. Configure the Serial port as follows:
1. Name: Select the COM port you saw above.
2. Baud: 38400
3. Data Size: 8
4. Parity: None
5. Handshake: None
6. Mode: Free
You must exactly match these settings between your Nucleo board and the hercules program. If the settings do not match, you
will see random characters when trying to print. Configure the Hercules program as indicated and click ‘open’.
How we print from the board: Now let us see how the code in main.c performs printing. We can print any array of
characters but it can be a hassle to manually convert values to be strings. This is one of the advantages of using printf; we
Page 4 of 5
Introduction to STM32 Nucleo
can print variables of different types (e.g., int, float) along with text using specifiers such as %d or %f, as you learned about in
APS105.
To do the same thing on this board, we can use the sprintf function – which operates in the same way as printf – but
‘prints’ the message to a character array instead of the terminal (i.e., stdout). To use this function to print, we need the following:
1. An array of type char to hold the message we want ‘printed’.
2. Include stdio.h at the top, so we can use the sprintf function.
3. Use sprintf to write to the character array.
4. Call the print msg function by passing in the character array we just created.
The print msg function itself is very simple; you can see this function in ‘config.c’. print msg simply takes a null-
terminated string (i.e., a character array that ends with \0) and prints each character one by one. You can continue to use the
print msg function to help you debug your code for the rest of ECE342.
Using printing carefully: While having the ability to print is a useful debug tool, you must be careful when doing this. While
running printf on a regular computer does not incur much overhead, this is not the case on embedded systems.
Printing long messages very often can slow down your board significantly. Keep your messages as short as possible and print
only the bare minimum information. Keep in mind you can also use the LED to debug you code. For example, you can set
the LED to blink at a specific rate at a certain point in your code; this way, the blinking LED will tell you that your program
successfully ran to that point.
Exploring the project: The Keil IDE provides you with a lot of tools you can use to help write, test and debug your programs.
For example, to take a look at main.h, you can just click on the file in the Outline window shown on the right.
You can also try running the program in ‘Debug’ mode, which allows you to set breakpoints and view register and memory
values after each instruction. However, keep in mind that ‘Debug’ mode only affects the CPU and does not affect the behaviour
of peripherals. You should be careful when using ‘Debug’ mode as you may not be able to reproduce a failure you see in the
regular ‘Run’ mode, when using ‘Debug’ mode. You should try this out now so you are familiar with it for your labs, when it
will come in handy for you to debug stubborn issues.