Lab 4: I2C peripheral ECE342, Winter 2026Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering University of Toronto
Introduction
In this lab, you will learn how to connect a peripheral device using the Inter-Integrated Circuit (I2C ) bus. Your task is to
interface with a small OLED display driven by the SSD1306 controller.
Inter-Integrated Circuit (I2C ) is a widely used communication protocol in embedded systems. It requires only two signals:
• Serial Clock Line (SCL) – synchronizes communication
• Serial Data Line (SDA) – carries the data
Multiple devices can share the same bus, each identified by a unique 7-bit address. This allows a single microcontroller to
communicate with many peripherals efficiently. Within one I2C transaction, you can read from or write to different registers on
a device.
While you will explore the details of the protocol in lectures, this lab focuses on practical application. You will use the
I2C functions provided by the STM Nucleo library. These functions abstract away the low-level signaling, enabling you to
send and receive data from the SSD1306 OLED controller without manually handling the bus protocol.
As you work, you may find it useful to consult the SSD1306 datasheet for details about the controller’s registers and functionality.
The datasheet is available online: SSD1306 OLED Controller Datasheet.
By the end of this lab, you will:
• Understand how the I2C bus enables communication between microcontrollers and peripherals
• Use STM Nucleo library functions to send and receive data over I2C
• Interface with the SSD1306 OLED controller to display information
Background
This section provides the essential background you need to work with the OLED display. There is a lot of detail here, so it is
strongly recommended that you read it carefully—ideally more than once—before writing any code. As you progress through
the lab, refer back to this section often.
Display
The OLED screen used in this lab is monochrome, meaning it supports only a single color. It has a resolution of 128 ×64
pixels: 128 pixels wide and 64 pixels tall. Each pixel can be set to either black or white.
Note: Depending on the specific screen, “white” may appear as yellow, blue, or another color chosen by the manufacturer.
As with all displays, each pixel is addressed by its row and column position. For this monochrome display, a pixel value of ‘0’
represents black and ‘1’ represents white. For example, Figure 1a shows a simple white rectangle, while Figure 1b illustrates
the pixel values required to draw it. With such a display, you can “draw” shapes by setting the appropriate pixels to ‘1’.
Packing Pixels into Bytes
The screen stores its 128 ×64 = 8,192 pixel values in a block of GDDRAM memory. This memory is byte-addressable,
meaning it consists of 1,024 memory locations, each 8 bits wide.
Importantly, the SSD1306 organizes memory into pages, where each byte represents a vertical column of 8 pixels. Thus, to set
a pixel at a specific row and column, you must calculate both the page number and the bit position within that byte. To turn on
the pixel at row 10, column 5:
• Write to page 1, column 5.
Interfacing with Peripherals — 2/7
(a) (b) (c)
Figure 1. (a) A simple white rectangle, (b) the corresponding pixel values for the first 12 rows and 16 columns, and (c) how
these pixels are stored in 8-bit memory locations.
• This corresponds to byte 133 in GDDRAM.
• Set bit 2 of that byte to 1.
In C:
gddram[1][5] |= (1 << 2);
Figure 2. Example of how each character is stored as a bitmap.
Displaying Text
A major part of this lab is writing text to the display. Characters, numbers, and symbols are formed by setting specific pixels to
‘1’ or ‘0’. Conceptually, this is similar to the seven-segment displays you may have used in earlier courses.
Figure 2 shows the bitmap for the letter ‘A’. Columns are labeled from 15 down to 0, and the red cells indicate pixels set to ‘1’.
Interfacing with Peripherals — 3/7
By storing such bitmaps, we can represent each printable character. Concatenating the bits for each row allows us to store the
character in binary or hexadecimal form. Collections of these bitmaps are called fonts.
Provided Fonts: Two fonts are included in the provided fonts.c file: Font11x18 and Font7x101. You will primarily
use Font11x18, which defines characters that are 11 pixels wide and 18 pixels tall. Both fonts store values as uint16_t
arrays.
Each font is stored as a large 1D array, with each entry corresponding to a single printable ASCII character. Although the array
is split across multiple lines in fonts.c for readability, it is logically one continuous row of values. For example, the letter ‘A’
in Figure 2 comes from the Font11x18 array (Line 153 in fonts.c). Each of the 18 values corresponds to one row of the
bitmap, with each 16-bit integer encoding the on/off state of pixels in that row. Printing a character requires correctly indexing
into this array.
Understanding ASCII: The font arrays are organized in ASCII order. ASCII is the standard encoding for text in digital
systems. For example, char c = ’A’; is equivalent to char c = 65;, since the ASCII value of ‘A’ is 65. A full list of
ASCII values can be found at this website.
The first 32 ASCII values are non-printable (e.g., Null, Backspace, Escape). The arrays in fonts.c begin at value 32, the first
printable character. To access the bitmap for a character, subtract 32 from its ASCII value. For example, ‘A’ has ASCII value
65, so its bitmap is stored at index 65 −32 = 33 in the Font11x18 array.
Strings: Strings in C/C++ are stored as arrays of ASCII characters terminated by a special ’\0’ (NULL) character. For
example:
char str[] = "ECE";
is equivalent to:
char str[] = {’E’, ’C’, ’E’, ’\0’};
The ’\0’ marks the end of the string. Although it is simply the value 0, using ’\0’ makes the intent clearer in code.
Key Takeaways
• The OLED display has a resolution of 128 ×64 pixels, each set to black (0) or white (1).
• The SSD1306 controller stores pixels in GDDRAM, organized into pages of 8 vertical pixels per byte.
• Fonts are stored as bitmaps, with each row of a character encoded as a 16-bit integer in the font array.
• ASCII values map directly to font indices: subtract 32 from the ASCII code to find the correct entry.
• Strings in C are null-terminated, meaning they end with the special ’\0’ character.
Hardware Setup
1. Using jumper cables, connect the SSD1306 OLED screen to the Nucleo board
as shown in Table 1.
2. Download the provided kit, unzip it, and navigate to Core\Src.
3. Verify that the expected files are present:
• Familiar: main.c, config.c, stm32f4xx hal msp.c,
stm32f4xx it.c, system stm32f4xx.c
• New: ssd1306.c, fonts.c
Table 1. SSD1306 OLED to Nucleo
Connections
OLED Pin Nucleo Pin Header
GND GND CN8
VDD 3V3 CN8
SDA PF0 CN9
SCL PF1 CN9
1 Font7x10 appears quite small on the 128 ×64 display, but is available for use in your project if desired.
Interfacing with Peripherals — 4/7
Checking Your Connections
Before writing any code, verify that your module is properly connected. Open main.c. After peripheral initialization,
the function HAL I2C IsDeviceReady() checks communication with the OLED.
- If successful (HAL OK), the Green LD1 LED turns on.
- If unsuccessful (HAL ERROR), the Red LD3 LED turns on.
Note: Double-check wiring before debugging code. Incorrect connections are the most common source of errors.
Understanding the Provided Code
In this lab, you will work with two key files specific to the SSD1306 OLED driver. Begin by opening Core\Inc\ssd1306.h.
File: ssd1306.h
This header file contains important definitions and prototypes:
• Several #define parameters specify the I2C address of the screen and its resolution in pixels.
• Additional #define statements identify registers used to control scrolling. These will be used later in the lab.
• A convenient typedef is provided for specifying pixel colors.
• The remainder of the file contains function prototypes for routines implemented in ssd1306.c.
File: ssd1306.c
This source file contains most of the code you will modify. At the top, three global arrays are declared:
1. SSD1306 Buffer: stores pixel values to be displayed on the screen.
2. SSD1306 Init Config: lists the registers required to initialize the OLED.
3. SSD1306 Scroll Commands: an empty array reserved for scrolling commands.
Following these arrays, several helper functions are provided for you:
• SSD1306_UpdateScreen – refreshes the display with the current buffer contents.
• SSD1306_Fill – fills the screen with a specified color.
• SSD1306_Clear – clears the display.
These functions are ready to use without modification. Guidance on when and how to apply them will be provided in later
sections of this document.
Implementing New Functionality
This section describes the functionality you must implement for this lab. For clarity, it is divided into several parts. You are
strongly encouraged to complete each part in order before moving on to the next one.
Part I: I2C Writes
In this part, you will implement basic write operations to the SSD1306 over I2C .
ssd1306 I2C Write:
This is the first (and most important) function you should implement. ssd1306_I2C_Write() requires four parameters:
1. address: The 7-bit address of the device.
2. reg: The register on the device to be accessed.
Interfacing with Peripherals — 5/7
3. data: The value to be written to that register.
4. count: The number of bytes to be transmitted.
As discussed in lecture, I2C writes occur in two logical stages:
1. Write the address of the device you want to communicate with.
2. Specify which register you want to write to, followed by the data bytes.
On the SSD1306 module, communication is controlled using a one-byte “control” field:
• 0x00 selects command bytes.
• 0x40 selects display data bytes.
On the Nucleo platform, I2C writes are performed using the HAL_I2C_Master_Transmit() function, which accepts the
following parameters:
1. hi2c: Pointer to an I2C_HandleTypeDef structure containing the configuration for the specified I2C peripheral.
2. DevAddress: The 7-bit address of the device.
3. pData: Pointer to the data buffer containing the values to be written.
4. Size: The number of bytes to send.
5. Timeout: A timeout value for the I2C controller if there is no response from the target device.
Start by writing code that sends one byte of data to a single register on the device. Create a small 2-entry array, where the first
element is the register (or control) byte and the second element is the data byte. You can then pass a pointer to this array to
HAL_I2C_Master_Transmit().
As with HAL_I2C_IsDeviceReady(), always check that HAL_I2C_Master_Transmit() returns HAL_OK to en-
sure that the transmission completed successfully. Once this function is working, you can move on to implementing
SSD1306_Init().
SSD1306 Init:
This function initializes the screen when the Nucleo board powers up. You will configure the SSD1306 by writing the
initialization bytes stored in the SSD1306_Init_Config array to the display.
To begin, loop over SSD1306_Init_Config and write each entry to the command path (using a control byte of 0x00) via
your ssd1306_I2C_Write() function. Next, call SSD1306_Init() from main() to verify that the screen initializes
correctly.
One simple test is to change the parameter passed to SSD1306_Fill() inside SSD1306_Init(). Set it to SSD1306_COLOR_WHITE
and confirm that the display turns white.
Although black and white are represented internally by 0 and 1, the color is always specified using the enumerated type
SSD1306_COLOR_t. By using SSD1306_COLOR_WHITE instead of just writing 1, your code more clearly communicates
that you are setting a color value. This improves readability and reduces the chance of errors.
Part II: Drawing Pixels
The next step is to be able to set individual pixels on the screen.
One (inefficient) option would be to write each pixel directly to the GDDRAM on the OLED module, one byte at a time.
However, this would be very slow. Instead, we can take advantage of the I2C controller’s ability to perform chained writes and
transfer all 8,192 bytes in a single transmission.
To do this, we will:
• Store the desired pixel values in the SSD1306_Buffer array.
• Copy the entire buffer to the GDDRAM in one operation.
Interfacing with Peripherals — 6/7
Note that SSD1306_Buffer is an array of uint8_t, and each pixel is represented by a single bit. Therefore, you must
determine exactly which bit of which array element needs to be set for a given pixel. Refer back to the earlier section on
packing pixels into bytes.
Based on that discussion, consider the following question: if you want to set one specific pixel to ‘1’, how would you do this in
code?
Complete the SSD1306_SetPixel() function so that it sets a specific pixel (given its x and y coordinates) to ‘1’ when the
color is white. Then, test your implementation by turning on a few individual pixels on the screen. Some example code is
provided in main() to help you get started.
Keep in mind that simply modifying SSD1306_Buffer does not automatically update the display. After you finish writing
pixels into SSD1306_Buffer, you must call SSD_UpdateScreen() to transmit the buffer contents to the screen over
I2C . Examine the provided SSD_UpdateScreen() function to understand how this transfer is performed.
Once you can reliably set individual pixels to ‘1’, try drawing simple straight lines by calling SSD1306_SetPixel() inside
a loop to set a continuous range of pixels. Next, experiment with drawing basic shapes such as rectangles and triangles. These
tests will also help you validate your code for the next part of the lab.
Part III: Scrolling
The SSD1306 controller allows you to scroll the display content either
left or right. Scrolling is performed at the level of pages. The GDDRAM
is divided into 8 pages, where each page corresponds to 8 rows of the
display. Therefore, when enabling scrolling, you must specify the starting
and ending pages; only the rows belonging to these pages will be scrolled,
while the remaining rows remain unchanged.
Implement scrolling in the SSD1306_Scroll() function. The first
parameter (direction) specifies the direction of scrolling. You must
use the enumerated type SSD1306_SCROLL_DIRECTION for this, as
defined in ssd1306.h. Similar to the use of SSD1306_COLOR_t ear-
lier, using this enumerated type ensures that your code explicitly selects a
scrolling direction and improves readability.
Table 2. Bytes to write for scrolling
Byte # Explanation Value
1 Scrolling direction 0x26 for right
0x27 for left
2 Dummy byte 0
3 First page to scroll start row
4 Scrolling frequency 0
5 Last page to scroll end row
6 Dummy byte 0
7 Dummy byte 0xFF
8 Activate scrolling 0x2F
Here, start_row and end_row are page indices (each page represents 8 pixel rows), as defined in ssd1306.h.
To enable scrolling, you must write the eight bytes shown in Table 2 to the SSD1306 over I2C .
You may use the SSD1306_Scroll_Commands array for this; simply assign the appropriate values inside SSD1306_Scroll().
All required constants are defined in ssd1306.h, and you should use these #define values rather than hard-coding numeric
literals.
Once the array is prepared, call ssd1306_I2C_Write() to transmit the bytes to the display. You should now observe the
display content scrolling left or right depending on the chosen direction.
Scrolling frequency (optional): Byte #4 in Table 2 controls the scrolling speed. The SSD1306 expresses this speed in terms of
‘frames’. If you wish to experiment with different speeds, use the byte values listed in Table 3.
Table 3. Values to control the speed of scrolling.
Frequency (frames) 2 3 4 5 25 64 128 256
Byte #4 value 7 4 5 0 6 1 2 3
Part IV: Writing Text
The next step is to display text on the screen. Begin by writing code to display a single character.
Writing a single character: Start by completing the SSD1306_Putc() function. Based on the input character (ch), you
must access the correct bitmap data from the corresponding font array. Recall that characters are passed in as ASCII values.
Each character in the Font11x18 font is stored as an array of uint16_t values. For each character:
• iterate over all 18 rows of bitmap data;
Interfacing with Peripherals — 7/7
• for each row, iterate over the top 11 bits (the remaining 5 bits are unused);
• for every bit that is set, use SSD1306_SetPixel() to update the corresponding location in SSD1306_Buffer.
The x and y parameters indicate the starting (x,y) coordinate at which the character should be drawn.
NOTE: Each element of Font11x18 is a uint16_t. Only the most significant 11 bits represent valid pixel data. The
unused bits are depicted in grey in Figure 2.
After implementing SSD1306_Putc(), test your code by calling it in main() with different x and y coordinates.
Writing strings: Once single-character output works, extend your implementation to support writing strings in the SSD1306_Puts()
function. This function accepts a null-terminated character array.
Loop through each character in the string until the ‘NULL’ terminator is reached.
For each character:
1. call SSD1306_Putc();
2. update SSD1306_CurrentX so that the next character is drawn immediately
to the right of the current one.
Figure 3 illustrates the pixel layout when printing the string "ECE342\n342"
using SSD1306_Puts(). Use this figure to confirm that your output appears at
the correct positions on the screen.
Support newlines: Before printing each character, check whether it is the newline
character (\n). If so, increment SSD1306_CurrentY to move to the next text
line, and reset SSD1306_CurrentX to the starting horizontal position.
Figure 3. Pixel positions for writing text.
1. In-lab Demo
During your lab session, to receive full marks, you must show your TA 3 lines of text scrolling right for 3 seconds and then left
for 3 seconds.
If you do not have all the parts working, you can demo the parts you have working for partial marks. If you cannot show text,
draw any shape and demo scrolling with that. If you cannot show text or scrolling, just draw any shape.
Your TA may ask questions about your solution. Be prepared to explain your design decisions and your code